README.md, before:


# Report 405 - DA Capstone

## Christopher Nicholson - 1st March, 2024

### Summary of Jira Sprints

In the [Jira sprints](./Jira/) we learned how to implement Scrum methodology and use the Jira tool while practicing the concepts we learned in the accompanying module. For instance, we started a sprint, assigned issues to ourselves, created SQL scripts, Python code, and other solutions to address said issues, and closed the sprint with the appropriate documentation of our work done.

### Core Capstone Components

#### Load Credit Card Database (SQL)

The data for the credit card database were given to us in the form of three JSON files with data on [bank branches](./data/cdw_sapp_branch.json), credit-card [customers](./data/cdw_sapp_custmer.json), and credit-card [transactions](./data/cdw_sapp_credit.json) that we downloaded ahead of time.

In my solution I wrote modules using Python, PySpark, the MySQL connector for Python, and SQL to read the data from these files, transform those data according to [specific mapping rules](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1t8UxBrUV6dxx0pM1VIIGZpSf4IKbzjdJ/edit#gid=672931242), and write those data to three tables in a locally-running instance of the MySQL RDBMS.

At application start, the module to [build the database](./build_database.py) is called first.  The build_database module will call a [module for reading data](./cdw_data_reader.py) from JSON files to get the data into a suitable format for transforming and writing it to the database, that latter accomplished by using [data adapter class](./dbadapter.py) whose purpose is to perform all database operations, such as creating the database, creating tables, and CRUD operations, including reading data from tables into PySpark dataframe objects.  

#### Application Front-End

Once translated from JSON, transformed, and written to MySQL tables, the data are then available for an end-user to query, which is effected by launching a [menu module](./menu.py) as soon as the build_database module is finished.  This module will offer the user a menu of choices encoded as numbers:

```python
Tasks Menu
[1] - Get a list of transactions by ZIP, month, and year
[2] - Get transaction totals by category
[3] - Get transaction totals by branch
[4] - Get customer details
[5] - Update customer details
[6] - Generate credit card bill
[7] - Get customer transactions in date range
Type a number to perform one of the above tasks, 0 to exit:
```

The menu module contains methods to execute each option.  There is also a [utility module](./utils.py) to handle a couple of common tasks in this application: converting dates to TIMEIDs and restricting user input to whole numbers.

#### Functional Requirements - Loan Application Dataset

Loan application data were also provided in the form of a RESTful JSON Web service [endpoint](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/platformps/LoanDataset/main/loan_data.json).  These data were read into the application by slightly tweaking the [JSON reader](./cdw_data_reader.py) module mentioned earlier.  From there, the process of transforming and writing the data to the MySQL RDBMS were essentially the same as used on the credit-card data.

The primary purpose of including the load application data was to serve as a way to showcase visualizations as seen in the next section.

#### Data Analysis and Visualization

In preparation for analysis, the data in the MySQL RDBMS tables was extracted into CSV files:
[branch table](./data/branch_table.csv)
[credit card table](./data/credit_card_table.csv)
[customer table](./data/customer_table.csv)
[loan table](./data/loan_table.csv)

Using Microsoft [Power BI](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/power-platform/products/power-bi/), we conducted several analyses of the data:

##### Credit Card data

###### Calculate and plot which transaction type has the highest transaction count

![image info](./visualizations/Req3.2CategoryHighestXactionCount.png)

###### Calculate and plot top 10 states with the highest number of customers

![image info](./visualizations/Req3.3Top10StatesByCustCount.png)

###### Calculate the total transaction sum for each customer based on their individual transactions. Identify the top 10 customers with the highest transaction amounts (in dollar value). Create a plot to showcase these top customers and their transaction sums

![image info](./visualizations/Req3.4Top10Spenders.png)

##### Loan Application Data

###### Calculate and plot the percentage of applications approved for self-employed applicants. Use the appropriate chart or graph to represent this data

![image info](./visualizations/Req5.2Self-EmployedApproval.png)

###### Calculate the percentage of rejection for married male applicants. Use the ideal chart or graph to represent this data

![image info](./visualizations/Req5.3RejectedMarriedMen.png)

###### Calculate and plot the top three months with the largest volume of transaction data. Use the ideal chart or graph to represent this data

![image info](./visualizations/Req5.4Top3MonthByTransaction.png)

###### Calculate and plot which branch processed the highest total dollar value of healthcare transactions. Use the ideal chart or graph to represent this data

![image info](./visualizations/Req5.5HighestTotalBranchHealth.png)

###### Comprehensive Dashboard

![image info](./visualizations/dashboard.png)

### Conclusion

The value of this Capstone was its ability to call into action the most important knowledge and skill we learned in this course.  In order to accomplish all the tasks required it was necessary to put to test our skills in Python, SQL, PySpark, and Power BI, not just indivdually, but in concert with each other.  The procedure from the inintial collection of data, cleansing that data, and figuring out how to find and present insight in it has given me an appreciation of the steps necessary to effictively work with data for any contexts and purposes.

### Appendix

#### List of code files in the project

1. [capstone_driver.py](./capstone_driver.py)
1. [build_database.py](./build_database.py)
1. [menu.py](./menu.py)
1. [dbadapter.py](./dbadapter.py)
1. [cdw_data_reader.py](./cdw_data_reader.py)
1. [utils.py](./utils.py)
1. [constants.py](./constants.py)
1. [load_loan_data.py](./load_loan_data.py)

#### Some references for guides that helped me with syntax

[references.txt](./references.txt)

Commit message:

Added verbage about choosing to rebuild db

README.md, after:


# Report 405 - DA Capstone

## Christopher Nicholson - 1st March, 2024

### Summary of Jira Sprints

In the [Jira sprints](./Jira/) we learned how to implement Scrum methodology and use the Jira tool while practicing the concepts we learned in the accompanying module. For instance, we started a sprint, assigned issues to ourselves, created SQL scripts, Python code, and other solutions to address said issues, and closed the sprint with the appropriate documentation of our work done.

### Core Capstone Components

#### Load Credit Card Database (SQL)

The data for the credit card database were given to us in the form of three JSON files with data on [bank branches](./data/cdw_sapp_branch.json), credit-card [customers](./data/cdw_sapp_custmer.json), and credit-card [transactions](./data/cdw_sapp_credit.json) that we downloaded ahead of time.

In my solution I wrote modules using Python, PySpark, the MySQL connector for Python, and SQL to read the data from these files, transform those data according to [specific mapping rules](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1t8UxBrUV6dxx0pM1VIIGZpSf4IKbzjdJ/edit#gid=672931242), and write those data to three tables in a locally-running instance of the MySQL RDBMS.

At application start, the user is asked if he wants to rebuild the database.  If that has been done recently the user can choose to skip the build-the-database step, othewise the module to [build the database](./build_database.py) is called first.  The build_database module will call a [module for reading data](./cdw_data_reader.py) from JSON files to get the data into a suitable format for transforming and writing them to the database, that latter accomplished by using a [data adapter class](./dbadapter.py) whose purpose is to perform all database operations such as creating the database, creating tables, and CRUD operations, including reading data from tables into PySpark dataframe objects.  

#### Application Front-End

Once translated from JSON, transformed, and written to MySQL tables, the data are then available for an end-user to query, which is effected by launching a [menu module](./menu.py) as soon as the build_database module is finished.  This module will offer the user a menu of choices encoded as numbers:

```python
Tasks Menu
[1] - Get a list of transactions by ZIP, month, and year
[2] - Get transaction totals by category
[3] - Get transaction totals for branches in a state
[4] - Get customer details
[5] - Update customer details
[6] - Generate credit card bill
[7] - Get customer transactions in date range
Type a number to perform one of the above tasks, 0 to exit:
```

The menu module contains methods to execute each option.  There is also a [utility module](./utils.py) to handle a couple of common tasks in this application: converting dates to TIMEIDs and restricting user input to whole numbers.

#### Functional Requirements - Loan Application Dataset

Loan application data were also provided in the form of a RESTful JSON Web service [endpoint](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/platformps/LoanDataset/main/loan_data.json).  These data were read into the application by slightly tweaking the [JSON reader](./cdw_data_reader.py) module mentioned earlier.  From there, the process of transforming and writing the data to the MySQL RDBMS were essentially the same as used on the credit-card data.

The primary purpose of including the load application data was to serve as a way to showcase visualizations as seen in the next section.

#### Data Analysis and Visualization

In preparation for analysis, the data in the MySQL RDBMS tables was extracted into CSV files:
[branch table](./data/branch_table.csv)
[credit card table](./data/credit_card_table.csv)
[customer table](./data/customer_table.csv)
[loan table](./data/loan_table.csv)

Using Microsoft [Power BI](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/power-platform/products/power-bi/), we conducted several analyses of the data:

##### Credit Card data

###### Calculate and plot which transaction type has the highest transaction count

![image info](./visualizations/Req3.2CategoryHighestXactionCount.png)

###### Calculate and plot top 10 states with the highest number of customers

![image info](./visualizations/Req3.3Top10StatesByCustCount.png)

###### Calculate the total transaction sum for each customer based on their individual transactions. Identify the top 10 customers with the highest transaction amounts (in dollar value). Create a plot to showcase these top customers and their transaction sums

![image info](./visualizations/Req3.4Top10Spenders.png)

##### Loan Application Data

###### Calculate and plot the percentage of applications approved for self-employed applicants. Use the appropriate chart or graph to represent this data

![image info](./visualizations/Req5.2Self-EmployedApproval.png)

###### Calculate the percentage of rejection for married male applicants. Use the ideal chart or graph to represent this data

![image info](./visualizations/Req5.3RejectedMarriedMen.png)

###### Calculate and plot the top three months with the largest volume of transaction data. Use the ideal chart or graph to represent this data

![image info](./visualizations/Req5.4Top3MonthByTransaction.png)

###### Calculate and plot which branch processed the highest total dollar value of healthcare transactions. Use the ideal chart or graph to represent this data

![image info](./visualizations/Req5.5HighestTotalBranchHealth.png)

###### Comprehensive Dashboard

![image info](./visualizations/dashboard.png)

### Conclusion

The value of this Capstone was its ability to call into action the most important knowledge and skill we learned in this course.  In order to accomplish all the tasks required it was necessary to put to test our skills in Python, SQL, PySpark, and Power BI, not just indivdually, but in concert with each other.  The procedure from the inintial collection of data, cleansing that data, and figuring out how to find and present insight in it has given me an appreciation of the steps necessary to effictively work with data for any contexts and purposes.

### Appendix

#### List of code files in the project

1. [capstone_driver.py](./capstone_driver.py)
1. [build_database.py](./build_database.py)
1. [menu.py](./menu.py)
1. [dbadapter.py](./dbadapter.py)
1. [cdw_data_reader.py](./cdw_data_reader.py)
1. [utils.py](./utils.py)
1. [constants.py](./constants.py)
1. [load_loan_data.py](./load_loan_data.py)

#### Some references for guides that helped me with syntax

[references.txt](./references.txt)
